---
layout: post
title: "Using TikZ for the most beautiful LaTeX figures"
date: 2019-12-01
categories: latex figures
---

Using TikZ for creating LaTeX figures is a typical case "high initial effort, high reward": it takes a bit of time (say, a week) to learn it, but after that, you'll benefit from it during your entire thesis, and your figure-game will be out of this world. If that doesn't sound appealing enough already, let me help you to get started even faster!

### What is TikZ?

TikZ is a way of creating images programmatically. Instead of aligning shapes by hand, you specify their coordinates and style, and TikZ takes care of the rest. This means that you can make precisely the figure you want. Unfortunately, the programming syntax (if you can even call it that) is a bit obscure, the online manuals are very extensive but also way to long to quickly scroll through, and errors are often incomprehensible. But don't let this hold you back! This post and Stack Overflow have got you covered.

### Including packages

There are different types of TikZ figures you can create, and they need different packages. `tikz` is the basic package that you'll always have to include. Apart from this, I find `tikz-3dplot` quite handy: it gives you a 3D coordinate system instead of a 2D one, which means that you can create images in 3D and rotate them any way you want for the perfect 2D view. For figures that include lots of data points (plots and such), you'll want to use `pgfplots`: it takes care of most of the plot related stuff such as axes and axis ticks, and it allows you to include data from text files. There are also numerous types of plots, from 3D surface plots to line plots to scatter plots.

Let's first discuss the header I'm currently using. There are two types of includes: the actual packages, and the various TikZ libraries that you want to use in your figures (such as arrows, shadows and various shapes).

{% highlight latex %}

\usepackage{tikz}
\usepackage{tikz-3dplot}
\usepackage{pgfplots}

\usetikzlibrary{matrix}
\usetikzlibrary{chains}
\usetikzlibrary{positioning}
\usetikzlibrary{arrows}
\usetikzlibrary{arrows.meta}
\usetikzlibrary{shadows.blur}
\usetikzlibrary{decorations.pathreplacing}
\usetikzlibrary{angles}
\usetikzlibrary{quotes}
\usetikzlibrary{shapes}
\usetikzlibrary{patterns}
\usetikzlibrary{external}

{% endhighlight %}

The TikZ library `external` deserves some extra attention. In case you have many TikZ figures in your document, compiling can become very, very slow. `external` allows you to render these figures once and save them in a separate folder. During the next compilation, only changed figures will be re-rendered. A special LaTeX call is also needed for this (allowing it to execute shell commands), as the code below shows:

{% highlight latex %}

\tikzexternalize[prefix=tikz_dump/]  % save to the folder tikz_dump/
\tikzset{external/system call={xelatex -shell-escape -interaction=batchmode -jobname "\image" "\texsource"}}  % change xelatex to pdflatex in case you're using that

{% endhighlight %}

### A simple figure

The agent-environment model of reinforcement learning (from the [book](http://incompleteideas.net/book/RLbook2018.pdf) by Sutton and Barto) is a good candidate for a simple TikZ figure. It consists of some arrows and some rectangles with text in them. I'll first show you the code, and discuss it afterwards.

{% highlight latex %}

\begin{figure}[h!]
    \centering
    \scalebox{0.9}{\begin{tikzpicture}[scale=0.8]

        \draw[-Latex,line width=3pt,color=red!60!white] (5,5.75) -- (8,5.75) -- (8,0.75) node[pos=0.5, right=0.2] {\LARGE ${A_t}$} -- (6,0.75);
        \draw[-Latex,line width=3pt,color=blue!50!white] (0,0.45) -- (-2,0.45) node[pos=0.5,below=0.2] {\LARGE $S_{t+1}$};
        \draw[-Latex,line width=3pt,color=green!50!white] (0,1.05) -- (-2,1.05) node[pos=0.5,above=0.2] {\LARGE $R_{t+1}$};
        \draw[-Latex,line width=3pt,color=blue!50!white] (-2,0.45) -- (-4,0.45) -- (-4,6.05) node[pos=0.5,left=0.2] {\LARGE $S_{t}$} -- (1,6.05);
        \draw[-Latex,line width=3pt,color=green!50!white] (-2,1.05) -- (-3.4,1.05) -- (-3.4,5.45) node[pos=0.5,right=0.2] {\LARGE $R_{t}$} -- (1,5.45);
        
        \draw[very thick,dashed] (-2,-0.05) -- (-2,1.55);
    
        \draw[ultra thick,rounded corners,fill=white,blur shadow] (1,5) rectangle (5,6.5) node[pos=0.5] {\sffamily\bfseries\LARGE Agent};
        \draw[ultra thick,rounded corners,fill=white,blur shadow] (0,0) rectangle (6,1.5) node[pos=0.5] {\sffamily\bfseries\LARGE Environment};

    \end{tikzpicture}}
    \caption[Interaction between agent and environment.]{Interaction between agent and environment. Adapted from \textcite{sutton_reinforcement_2018}.}
    \label{fig:rl}
\end{figure}

{% endhighlight %}

A `tikzpicture` is usually enclosed in a regular LaTeX `figure`. There are two ways of scaling a `tikzpicture`: either using `\scalebox{}`, which concerns the entire figure and all its text and scales everything nicely, or using the `scale=...` argument of `tikzpicture`, which scales stuff like shapes but leaves text untouched. Therefore, the former should be preferred.

The next five lines all draw arrows, which can be seen from the `-Latex` argument in `\draw[]`. Here, `Latex` is actually the name of the type of arrowhead we want to use (part of the `arrows.meta` library I think), and it could be replaced by, e.g., `>`. To have a line with an arrowhead on both ends you would do `Latex-Latex` or `<->`. The next argument in `\draw[]` is the line width (speaks for itself), after which follows the line's colour. I mixed two colours here (because I don't like the regular red/green/blue), for instance 60% red and and 40% white: `red!60!white`. After the closing `]`, the actual line specification starts, with `(x, y)` the coordinates of the line's nodes and `--` the sign for connecting these nodes. In case you want to place text next to a line segment, you call `node[]` between the two `(x,y)` coordinates that specify the ends of this segment. The arguments for `node[]` give the position of the text relative to the starting point of the segment. So, `(8,0.75) node[pos=0.5, right=0.2] {\LARGE ${A_t}$} -- (6,0.75)` means: place the text `$A_t$` with font size `\LARGE` halfway between `(8,0.75)` and `(6,0.75)`, and on the right with a spacing of `0.2`.

Line widths can also be specified with words, such as `very thick` or `thick`, and you can also specify the line style, such as `dotted` or `dashed`. Of course, you could draw a rectangle by just connecting four line segments, but the TikZ library `shapes` gives you the possibility to do this with a single command. The last two `\draw[]` commands draw two filled rectangles with a shadow and rounded corners, just by specifying their bottom left and upper right corners and putting `rectangle` in between. To place text exactly in the middle of this rectangle, use the `node[]` argument that indicates halfway: `pos=0.5`.

### 3D figures

As mentioned before, `tikz-3dplot` allows you to work with 3D coordinate systems. The below code illustrates an example of this, using it to visualise the [*pinhole camera model*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinhole_camera_model) by Longuet-Higgins and Prazdny.

{% highlight latex %}

\begin{figure}[h!]
    \centering
    \tdplotsetmaincoords{75}{120}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[tdplot_main_coords]

        \draw[thick] (0,0,0) -- (3.4,0,0);
        \draw[thick,dotted] (3.4,0,0) -- (6,0,0);
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (6,0,0) -- (15,0,0) node[above] {$Z$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (0,0,0) -- (0,5,0) node[above] {$X$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (0,0,0) -- (0,0,5) node[left] {$Y$};
        \node[above right] at (0,0,0) {$O$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (14,0,-0.6) -- (15,0,-0.6) node[pos=0,right] {$W$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (0,4,-0.6) -- (0,5,-0.6) node[pos=0,left] {$U$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick] (-0.6,0,4) -- (-0.6,0,5) node[pos=0,below] {$V$};
        \draw[thick,red] (0,0,0) -- (4.8,0.8,0.8);
        \draw[thick,dotted,red] (4.8,0.8,0.8) -- (6,1,1) node[above] {$a$};
        \draw[thick] (6,-1.5,-1.5) -- (6,1.5,-1.5) -- (6,1.5,1.5) -- (6,-1.5,1.5) -- cycle;
        \draw[-Latex,thick,dashed] (6,0,-1.5) -- (6,0,1.5) node[below left] {$y$};
        \draw[-Latex,thick,dashed] (6,-1.5,0) -- (6,1.5,0) node[above left] {$x$};
        \node[circle,draw,inner sep=0pt,minimum size=2pt,red] at (6,1,1) {};
        \node[circle,draw,inner sep=0pt,minimum size=2pt,label=below right:{$o$}] at (6,0,0) {};
        \draw[thick,red] (6,1,1) -- (18,3,3) node[circle,fill=red,inner sep=0pt,minimum size=3pt,label=above:{$A$}] {};
        \tdplotdrawarc[-latex,thick]{(0,0,1.5)}{0.4}{-90}{90}{below}{$q$};
        \tdplotsetrotatedcoords{0}{90}{0};
        \tdplotdrawarc[-latex,thick,tdplot_rotated_coords]{(0,0,1.5)}{0.4}{0}{180}{right}{$r$};
        \tdplotsetrotatedcoords{90}{90}{0};
        \tdplotdrawarc[-latex,thick,tdplot_rotated_coords]{(0,0,1.5)}{0.4}{90}{270}{above}{$p$};

    \end{tikzpicture}
    \caption[Pinhole camera model.]{Pinhole camera model. Adapted from \textcite{longuet-higgins_interpretation_1980}.}
    \label{fig:pcm}
\end{figure}

{% endhighlight %}

The view on the 3D figure is specified with `\tdplotsetmaincoords{75}{120}` and consecutively attaching this view to the `tikzpicture` by supplying the argument `tdplot_main_coords`. The main difference with the previous example is the fact that coordinates now exist as `(x,y,z)`. Furthermore, you can also draw a `\node[]` that doesn't belong to a certain line or other shape: `\node[above right] at (0,0,0) {$O$}` puts a zero above and to the right of the origin, while `\node[circle,draw,inner sep=0pt,minimum size=2pt,label=below right:{$o$}] at (6,0,0) {}` draws a filled (`inner sep=0pt` and `minimum size=2pt` take care of this), circular node with a label below and to the right (which, apparently for nodes with shapes, has to be specified like this instead of between `{}` at the end). Finally, the three arcs around the axes are drawn by temporarily rotating the coordinate system with `\tdplotsetrotatedcoords{}{}{}` and then specifying the arcs in this system with a `latex` arrowhead.

### Data plots with `pgfplots`

I won't be giving an example of a `pgfplots` plot here, but their [documentation](http://ctan.cs.uu.nl/graphics/pgf/contrib/pgfplots/doc/pgfplots.pdf) is actually really good (with lots of examples), so just have a look at that.

### So, use TikZ or not?

Definitely use it for flowchart-related stuff; these are simple figures to create and look much better than anything created with PowerPoint or some web program. 3D axis systems like the one above are also pretty much impossible to make (accurately) with anything but TikZ. It's also great for the neural network architecture figures you see in papers, see for example [here](https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/439170/drawing-a-cnn-with-tikz). For anything else, it's up to you :)
